> Data parallelism refers to the phenomenon in which the computation work to be performed on different parts of the dataset can be done independently of each other and thus can be done in parallel with each other. 

[[Programming Massively Parallel Processors.pdf#page=46&selection=68,0,70,56|Programming Massively Parallel Processors, page 46]]


## 2.1 Data Parallelism

> Writing data parallel code entails (re)organizing the computation around the data such that we can execute the resulting independent computations in parallel to complete the overall job faster—often much faster.

[[Programming Massively Parallel Processors.pdf#page=47&selection=49,2,52,33|Programming Massively Parallel Processors, page 47]]

> Task Parallelism vs. Data Parallelism
> Data parallelism is not the only type of parallelism used in parallel programming. Task parallelism has also been used extensively in parallel programming. Task parallelism is typically exposed through task decomposition of applications. For example, a simple application may need to do a vector addition and a matrix-vector multiplication. Each of these would be a task. Task parallelism exists if the two tasks can be done independently. I/O and data transfers are also common sources of tasks. In large applications, there are usually a larger number of independent tasks and therefore larger amount of task parallelism. For example, in a molecular dynamics simulator, the list of natural tasks includes vibrational forces, rotational forces, neighbor identification for non-bonding forces, non-bonding forces, velocity and position, and other physical properties based on velocity and position. In general, data parallelism is the main source of scalability for parallel programs. With large datasets, one can often find abundant data parallelism to be able to utilize massively parallel processors and allow application performance to grow with each generation of hardware that has more execution resources. Nevertheless, task parallelism can also play an important role in achieving performance goals. We will be covering task parallelism later when we introduce streams

[[Programming Massively Parallel Processors.pdf#page=49&selection=0,0,25,52|Programming Massively Parallel Processors, page 49]]


## 2.2 CUDA C Program Structure

> The structure of a CUDA C program reflects the coexistence of a host (CPU) and one or more devices (GPUs) in the computer. Each CUDA C source file can have a mixture of host code and device code. By default, any traditional C program is a CUDA program that contains only host code. One can add device code into any source file. The device code is clearly marked with special CUDA C keywords. The device code includes functions, or kernels, whose code is executed in a data-parallel manner.

[[Programming Massively Parallel Processors.pdf#page=50&selection=15,1,32,24|Programming Massively Parallel Processors, page 50]]

> The execution starts with host code (CPU serial code). When a kernel function is called, a large number of threads are launched on a device to execute the kernel. All the threads that are launched by a kernel call are collectively called a grid.

[[Programming Massively Parallel Processors.pdf#page=50&selection=33,61,43,1|Programming Massively Parallel Processors, page 50]]

> CUDA programmers can assume that these threads take very few clock cycles to generate and schedule, owing to efficient hardware support. This assumption contrasts with traditional CPU threads, which typically take thousands of clock cycles to generate and schedule.

[[Programming Massively Parallel Processors.pdf#page=51&selection=8,68,12,16|Programming Massively Parallel Processors, page 51]]

> A thread is a simplified view of how a processor executes a sequential program in modern computers. A thread consists of the code of the program, the point in the code that is being executed, and the values of its variables and data structures. The execution of a thread is sequential as far as a user is concerned. One can use a source-level debugger to monitor the progress of a thread by executing one statement at a time, looking at the statement that will be executed next and checking the values of the variables and data structures as the execution progresses. Threads have been used in programming for many years. If a programmer wants to start parallel execution in an application, he/she creates and manages multiple threads using thread libraries or special languages. In CUDA, the execution of each thread is sequential as well. A CUDA program initiates parallel execution by calling kernel functions, which causes the underlying runtime mechanisms to launch a grid of threads that process different parts of the data in parallel.

[[Programming Massively Parallel Processors.pdf#page=51&selection=18,0,35,1|Programming Massively Parallel Processors, page 51]]


## 2.3 A Vector Addition Kernel

```c
void vecAdd(float* A_h, float* B_h, float* C_h, int n) {
	for (int i = 0; i < n; ++i) {
		C_h[i] = A_h[i] + B_h[i];
	}
}

int main() {
	// Memory allocation for array A, B and C
	// I/O to read A and B, N elements each
	...
	vecAdd(A, B, C, N);
}
```

- In all examples, whenever there is a need to distinguish between host and device there will be a suffix
	- Variables that are used by the host with `_h`.
	- Variables that are used by a device with `_d`.

- A straightforward way to execute vector addition in parallel is to modify the `vecAdd` function and move it calculations to a new device.

```c
void vecAdd(float* A, float* B, float* C, int n) {
	int size = n* sizeof(float);
	float *d_A, *d_B, *d_C;
	
	// Part 1: Allocate device memory or A, B and C
	// Copy A and B to device memory
	...
	
	// Part 2: Call kernel - to launch a grid of threads
	// to perform the actual vector addition
	...
	
	// Part 3: Copy C from the device memory
	// Free device vectors
	...
}
```


## 2.4 Device Global Memory and Data Transfer

- GPUs will come with their own dynamic random-access memory (DRAM) called global memory.
- For example, an NVIDIA Volta V100 comes with 16GB or 32GB of global memory.
- Calling it "global memory" distinguishes it from other types of device memory that are also accessible to programmers.

- There are two API functions for allocating and freeing device global memory:
	- `cudaMalloc()`
		- Allocates object in the device global memory.
		- Two parameters:
			- **Address of a pointer** to the allocated object.
			- **Size** of allocated object in terms of bytes.
	- `cudaFree()`
		- Frees object from device global memory.
			- **Pointer** to freed object.

- These addresses should not be dereferences in the host machine.
	- Deferencing a device global memory pointer in the host code can cause exceptions or other types of runtime errors.

- To transfer memory from the host to the device, `cudaMemcpy()` can be called.
	- memory data transfer
	- Requires four parameters
		- Pointer to destination.
		- Pointer to source.
		- Number of bytes copied.
		- Type/Direction of transfer.

- The program becomes:

```c
void vecAdd(float* A_h, float* B_h, float* C_h, int n) {
	int size = n * sizeof(float);
	float *A_d, *B_d, *C_d;
	
	cudaMalloc((void **) &A_d, size);
	cudaMalloc((void **) &B_d, size);
	cudaMalloc((void **) &C_d, size);
	
	cudaMemcpy(A_d, A_h, size, cudaMemcpyHostToDevice);
	cudaMemcpy(B_d, B_h, size, cudaMemcopyHostToDevice);
	
	// Kernal invocation code - to be shown later
	...
	
	cudaMemcpy(C_h, C_d, size, cudaMemcpyDeviceToHost);
	
	cudaFree(A_d);
	cudaFree(B_d);
	cudaFree(C_d);
}
```

### Error Checking and Handling in CUDA

- It is also important to  check and handle errors.
- CUDA API functions return flags that indicate whether an error has occurred when they served the request.
- In practice, calls should be surrounded with code that test for error conditions and print out errors messages, so that the user can be away of the fact that an error has occurred.

```c
cudaError_t err = cudaMalloc((void**) &A_d, size);
if (err != cudaSuccess) {
	printf(
		"%s in %s at line %d\n",
		cudaGetErrorString(err),
		__FILE__,
		__LINE__,
	);
	exit(EXIT_FAILURE);
}
```


## 2.5 Kernel Functions and Threading

- A **kernel function** specifies the code to be executed by all thread during a parallel phase.
- Since all these threads execute the same code, CUDA is an instance of the well-known **single-program multiple-data (SPMD)** programming style for parallel computing systems.
	- Note that **SPMD** is not the same as SIMD (single instruction multiple data).
	- In a SPMD system the parallel processing units execute the same program on multiple parts of the data.
	- However, these processing units do not need to be executing the same instruction at the same time.
- When a program's host code calls a kernel, the CUDA runtime system launches a **grid of threads** that are organised into a two-level hierarchy.
- Each **grid** is organised into an array of **thread blocks** (or just **blocks**).
- All **blocks** of a grid are of the same size.
	- Contains up to 1024 threads on current systems.

- The total number of threads in each thread block is specified by the host code when a kernel is called.
- The same kernel can be called with different numbers of threads.
- For a given grid of threads, the number of threads in a block is available in a built-in variable named `blockDim`.
	- It is a struct with three unsigned integer fields:
		- `x`, `y`, `z`.
- This helps to organise threads into a one, two or three dimensional array.
- In general, it is recommended that the number of threads in each dimension of a thread block be a multiple of 32 for hardware efficiency reasons.
	- This will be revisited later.

- CUDA kernels have access to two more built-in variables (`threadIdx` and `blockIdx`) that allow threads to distinguish themselves from each other and to determine the area of data each thread is to work on.
	- `threadIdx` gives each thread a unique coordinate within a block.

> Like CUDA threads, many real-world systems are organized hierarchically. The U.S. telephone system is a good example. At the top level, the telephone system consists of “areas” each of which corresponds to a geographical area. All telephone lines within the same area have the same 3-digit “area code”. A telephone area is sometimes larger than a city. For example, many counties and cities of central Illinois are within the same telephone area and share the same area code 217. Within an area, each phone line has a seven-digit local phone number, which allows each area to have a maximum of about ten million numbers. One can think of each phone line as a CUDA thread, with the area code as the value of blockIdx and the seven-digital local number as the value of threadIdx. This hierarchical organization allows the system to have a very large number of phone lines while preserving “locality” for calling the same area. That is, when dialing a phone line in the same area, a caller only needs to dial the local number. As long as we make most of our calls within the local area, we seldom need to dial the area code. If we occasion-ally need to call a phone line in another area, we dial 1 and the area code, followed by the local number. (This is the reason why no local number in any area should start with a 1.) The hierarchical organization of CUDA threads also offers a form of locality. We will study this locality soon.

[[Programming Massively Parallel Processors.pdf#page=60&selection=30,0,68,1|Programming Massively Parallel Processors, page 60]]`

- The `blockIdx` variable gives all threads in a block a common block coordinate.
- So, each thread can combine its `threadIdx` and `blockIdx` values to create a unique global index for itself within the entire grid.
	- This can be calculated as `i = blockIdx.x * blockDim.x + threadIdx.x`.

```c
// Compute vector sum C = A + B
// Each thread performs one pair-wise addition
__global__ void vecAddKernel(float* A, float* B, float* C, int n) {
	int i = thread.x + blockDim.x * blockIdx.x;
	if (i < n) {
		C[i] = A[i] + B[i];	
	}
}
```

- `__global__` is a keyword that indicates that the function is a kernel and that can be called to generate a grid of threads on a device.
	- Note that `_h` and `_d` are note used, since there is no potential confusion here.
	- There is no access to the host memory.

### Summary of Qualifier Keywords

| Qualifier Keyword    | Callable From    | Executed On | Executed By                |
| -------------------- | ---------------- | ----------- | -------------------------- |
| `__host__` (default) | Host             | Host        | Caller host thread         |
| `__global__`         | Host (or Device) | Device      | New grid of device threads |
| `__device__`         | Device           | Device      | Caller device thread       |

- A host function is simply a traditional function that executes on the host and can only be called by another host function.

- Note that `__host__` and `__device__` can be used in for a function declaration.
	- This combination tells the compilation system to generate two versions of object code for the same function.
	- One is executed on the host and can be called only from a host function.
	- The other is executed on the device and can be called only from a device or kernel function.
 - A second notable extension are the built-in variables `threadsIdx`, `blockIdx` and `blockDim`.
	 - Recall that all threads execute the same kernel code and there needs to be a way for them to distinguish themselves from each other and direct each thread towards a particular part of the data.
	 - These built-in variables are the means for threads to access hardware registers that provide the identifying coordinates to threads.
	- Different threads will see different values in their `threadIdx.x`, `blockIdx.x` and `blockDim.x` variables.
- There is an automatic (local) variable `i`.
	- In a CUDA kernel function, automatic variables are private for every thread.
- Note that if there is an `if (i < n)` statement, this is because not all vector lengths can be expressed as multiples of the block size.
	- For example, if a vector length is 100, the smallest efficient thread block dimension is 32.
	- If 32 is picked as the block size, four thread blocks would have 128 threads.
	- The last 28 threads in thread block 3 would need be disabled.
	- This allows the kernel to be called to process vectors of arbitrary lengths.


## 2.6 Calling Kernel Functions

```c
int vectAdd(float* A, float* B, float* C, int n) {
	// A_d, B_d, C_d allocations and copies omitted
	...
	// Launch ceil(n / 256) blocks of 256 threads each
	vecAddKernel<<<ceil(n / 256.0), 256>>>(A_d, B_d, C_d);
}
```

- When the host code calls a kernel, it sets the grid and thread block dimensions via **execution configuration parameters**.
- The configuration parameters are given between the `<<<` and `>>>` before the tradition function arguments.
- Note that all the thread blocks operate on different parts of the vectors.
	- They can be executed in any arbitrary order.
	- The programmer must not make any assumptions regarding execution order.


- Full example:

```c
void vecAdd(float A, float* B, float* C, int n) {
	float *A_d, *B_d, *C_d;
	int size = n * sizeof(float);
	
	cudaMalloc((void **) &A_d, size);
	cudaMalloc((void **) &B_d, size);
	cudaMalloc((void**) &C_d, size);
	
	vecAddKernel<<<ceil(n / 256.0), 256>>>(A_d, B_d, C_d, n);
	
	cudaMemcopy(C, C_d, size, cudaMemcpuDeviceToHost);
	
	cudaFree(A_d);
	cudaFree(B_d);
	cudaFree(C_d);
} 
```


## 2.7 Compilation

- Implementing CUDA C kernels requires using various extensions that are not part of C.
	- Once these extensions have been used in the code, it is no longer acceptable to a tradition C compiler.
- The code needs to be compiled by a compiler that recognises and understands these extensions, such as NVCC (NVIDIA C Compiler).
	- It will create host code, with the host preprocessor and compiler/linker.
	- It will also create the device code (PTX) using a device just-in-time compiler.
		- These PTX files are further compiled by a runtime component of NVCC into the real object files and executed on  a CUDA-capable GPU device.
	- They can them be combined.
